# Chapter 2. The Singleton Design Pattern

In the previous chapter, we explored design patterns and their classifications. As we are aware, design patterns can be classified under three main categories: structural, behavioral, and creational patterns.  

在前面一章，我们浏览了设计模式及其分类。就像我们所了解到那样，设计模式可以分为三个主要种类：构造，行为，和创建模式。  

In this chapter, we will go through the Singleton design pattern—one of the simplest and well-known Creational design patterns used in application development. This chapter will give you a brief introduction to the Singleton pattern, take you through a real-world example where this pattern can be used, and explain it in detail with the help of Python implementations. You will learn about the Monostate (or Borg) design pattern that is a variant of the Singleton design pattern.  

本章，我们会搞懂单例设计模式——最简单的一个设计模式，

In this chapter, we will cover the following topics in brief:  

- An understanding of the Singleton design pattern
- A real-world example of the Singleton pattern
- The Singleton pattern implementation in Python
- The Monostate (Borg) pattern

- 理解单例设计模式
- 单例模式的实际例子
- Python中的单例模式实现
- 单态模式

At the end of the chapter, we have a short summary on Singletons. This will help you think independently about some of the aspects of the Singleton design pattern.  

本章最后，我们对单例设计模式进行了总结。它可以帮助你独立地理解单例设计模式的某些方面。  

 
## Understanding the Singleton design pattern 理解单例设计模式

Singleton provides you with a mechanism to have one, and only one, object of a given type and provides a global point of access. Hence, Singletons are typically used in cases such as logging or database operations, printer spoolers, and many others, where there is a need to have only one instance that is available across the application to avoid conflicting requests on the same resource. For example, we may want to use one database object to perform operations on the DB to maintain data consistency or one object of the logging class across multiple services to dump log messages in a particular log file sequentially.  

单例提供了一个

In brief, the intentions of the Singleton design pattern are as follows:  

简而言之，

－ Ensuring that one and only one object of the class gets created
－ Providing an access point for an object that is global to the program
－ Controlling concurrent access to resources that are shared

The following is the UML diagram for Singleton:  

img:omit   

A simple way of implementing Singleton is by making the constructor private and creating a static method that does the object initialization. This way, one object gets created on the first call and the class returns the same object thereafter.  

In Python, we will implement it in a different way as there's no option to create private constructors. Let's take a look at how Singletons are implemented in the Python language.  

 
### Implementing a classical Singleton in Python Python中的典型单例的实现

Here is a sample code of the Singleton pattern in Python v3.5. In this example, we will do two major things:  

1. We will allow the creation of only one instance of the Singleton class.
2. If an instance exists, we will serve the same object again.

The following code shows this:  

```python
class Singleton(object):

     def __new__(cls):

       if not hasattr(cls, 'instance'):

         cls.instance = super(Singleton, cls).__new__(cls)

       return cls.instance



s = Singleton()

print("Object created", s)



s1 = Singleton()

print("Object created", s1)
```


The output of the preceding snippet is given here:  

img:omit  

In the preceding code snippet, we override the `__new__` method (Python's special method to instantiate objects) to control the object creation. The s object gets created with the `__new__` method, but before this, it checks whether the object already exists. The hasattr method (Python's special method to know if an object has a certain property) is used to see if the cls object has the instance property, which checks whether the class already has an object. Till the time the s1 object is requested, hasattr() detects that an object already exists and hence s1 allocates the existing object instance (located at 0x102078ba8).  

## Lazy instantiation in the Singleton pattern

One of the use cases for the Singleton pattern is lazy instantiation. For example, in the case of module imports, we may accidently create an object even when it's not needed. Lazy instantiation makes sure that the object gets created when it's actually needed. Consider lazy instantiation as the way to work with reduced resources and create them only when needed.  

In the following code example, when we say s=Singleton(), it calls the __init__ method but no new object gets created. However, actual object creation happens when we call Singleton.getInstance(). This is how lazy instantiation is achieved.  

```python
class Singleton:

    __instance = None

    def __init__(self):

        if not Singleton.__instance:

            print(" __init__ method called..")

        else:

            print("Instance already created:", self.getInstance())

    @classmethod

    def getInstance(cls):

        if not cls.__instance:

            cls.__instance = Singleton()

        return cls.__instance



s = Singleton() ## class initialized, but object not created

print("Object created", Singleton.getInstance()) # Object gets created here

s1 = Singleton() ## instance already created
```

## Module-level Singletons

All modules are Singletons by default because of Python's importing behavior. Python works in the following way:  

1. Checks whether a Python module has been imported.
2. If imported, returns the object for the module. If not imported, imports and instantiates it.
3. So when a module gets imported, it is initialized. However, when the same module is imported again, it's not initialized again, which relates to the Singleton behavior of having only one object and returning the same object.

## The Monostate Singleton pattern

We discussed the Gang of Four and their book in Chapter 1, Introduction to Design Patterns. GoF's Singleton design pattern says that there should be one and only one object of a class. However, as per Alex Martelli, typically what a programmer needs is to have instances sharing the same state. He suggests that developers should be bothered about the state and behavior rather than the identity. As the concept is based on all objects sharing the same state, it is also known as the Monostate pattern.  

The Monostate pattern can be achieved in a very simple way in Python. In the following code, we assign the `__dict__` variable (a special variable of Python) with the `__shared_state class` variable. Python uses `__dict__` to store the state of every object of a class. In the following code, we intentionally assign `__shared_state` to all the created instances. So when we create two instances, 'b' and 'b1', we get two different objects unlike Singleton where we have just one object. However, the object states, `b.__dict__` and `b1.__dict__` are the same. Now, even if the object variable x changes for object b, the change is copied over to the `__dict__` variable that is shared by all objects and even b1 gets this change of the x setting from one to four:  

```python
class Borg:

    __shared_state = {"1":"2"}

    def __init__(self):

        self.x = 1

        self.__dict__ = self.__shared_state

        pass



b = Borg()

b1 = Borg()

b.x = 4



print("Borg Object 'b': ", b) ## b and b1 are distinct objects

print("Borg Object 'b1': ", b1)

print("Object State 'b':", b.__dict__)## b and b1 share same state

print("Object State 'b1':", b1.__dict__)
```

The following is the output of the preceding snippet:  

img:omit  

Another way to implement the Borg pattern is by tweaking the `__new__` method itself. As we know, the `__new__` method is responsible for the creation of the object instance:  

```python
class Borg(object):

     _shared_state = {}

     def __new__(cls, *args, **kwargs):

       obj = super(Borg, cls).__new__(cls, *args, **kwargs)

       obj.__dict__ = cls._shared_state

       return obj
```

## Singletons and metaclasses

Let's start with a brief introduction to metaclasses. A metaclass is a class of a class, which means that the class is an instance of its metaclass. With metaclasses, programmers get an opportunity to create classes of their own type from the predefined Python classes. For instance, if you have an object, MyClass, you can create a metaclass, MyKls, that redefines the behavior of MyClass to the way that you need. Let's understand them in detail.  

In Python, everything is an object. If we say a=5, then type(a) returns `<type 'int'>`, which means a is of the int type. However, type(int) returns `<type 'type'>`, which suggests the presence of a metaclass as int is a class of the type type.  

The definition of class is decided by its metaclass, so when we create a class with class A, Python creates it by A = type(name, bases, dict):  

- name: This is the name of the class
- base: This is the base class
- dict: This is the attribute variable

Now, if a class has a predefined metaclass (by the name of MetaKls), Python creates the class by A = MetaKls(name, bases, dict).  

Let's look at a sample metaclass implementation in Python 3.5:  

```python
class MyInt(type):

    def __call__(cls, *args, **kwds):

        print("***** Here's My int *****", args)

        print("Now do whatever you want with these objects...")

        return type.__call__(cls, *args, **kwds)





class int(metaclass=MyInt):

    def __init__(self, x, y):

        self.x = x

        self.y = y


i = int(4,5)
```

The following is the output of the preceding code:  

img:omit  

Python's special `__call__` method gets called when an object needs to be created for an already existing class. In this code, when we instantiate the int class with int(4,5), the `__call__` method of the MyInt metaclass gets called, which means that the metaclass now controls the instantiation of the object. Wow, isn't this great?!  

The preceding philosophy is used in the Singleton design pattern as well. As the metaclass has more control over class creation and object instantiation, it can be used to create Singletons. (Note: To control the creation and initialization of a class, metaclasses override the `__new__` and `__init__` method.)  

The Singleton implementation with metclasses can be explained better with the following example code:   

```python
class MetaSingleton(type):

    _instances = {}

    def __call__(cls, *args, **kwargs):

        if cls not in cls._instances:

            cls._instances[cls] = super(MetaSingleton, \

                cls).__call__(*args, **kwargs)

        return cls._instances[cls]


class Logger(metaclass=MetaSingleton):

    pass



logger1 = Logger()

logger2 = Logger()

print(logger1, logger2)
```

## A real-world scenario – the Singleton pattern, part 1

As a practical use case, we will look at a database application to show the use of Singletons. Consider an example of a cloud service that involves multiple read and write operations on the database. The complete cloud service is split across multiple services that perform database operations. An action on the UI (web app) internally will call an API, which eventually results in a DB operation.  

It's clear that the shared resource across different services is the database itself. So, if we need to design the cloud service better, the following points must be taken care of:  

Consistency across operations in the database—one operation shouldn't result in conflicts with other operations
Memory and CPU utilization should be optimal for the handling of multiple operations on the database
A sample Python implementation is given here:  

```python
import sqlite3

class MetaSingleton(type):

    _instances = {}

    def __call__(cls, *args, **kwargs):

        if cls not in cls._instances:

            cls._instances[cls] = super(MetaSingleton, \

                cls).__call__(*args, **kwargs)

        return cls._instances[cls]


class Database(metaclass=MetaSingleton):

  connection = None

  def connect(self):

    if self.connection is None:

        self.connection = sqlite3.connect("db.sqlite3")

        self.cursorobj = self.connection.cursor()

    return self.cursorobj



db1 = Database().connect()

db2 = Database().connect()



print ("Database Objects DB1", db1)

print ("Database Objects DB2", db2)
```

The output of the preceding code is given here:  

img:omit  

In the preceding code, we can see following points being covered:  

1. We created a metaclass by the name of MetaSingleton. Like we explained in the previous section, the special `__call__` method of Python is used in the metaclass to create a Singleton.  

2. The database class is decorated by the MetaSingleton class and starts acting like a Singleton. So, when the database class is instantiated, it creates only one object.  

3. When the web app wants to perform certain operations on the DB, it instantiates the database class multiple times, but only one object gets created. As there is only one object, calls to the database are synchronized. Additionally, this is inexpensive on system resources and we can avoid the situation of memory or CPU resource.

Consider that instead of having one webapp, we have a clustered setup with multiple web apps but only one DB. Now, this is not a good situation for Singletons because, with every web app addition, a new Singleton gets created and a new object gets added that queries the database. This results in unsynchronized database operations and is heavy on resources. In such cases, database connection pooling is better than implementing Singletons.  

## A real-world scenario – the Singleton pattern, part 2

Let's consider another scenario where we implement health check services (such as Nagios) for our infrastructure. We create the HealthCheck class, which is implemented as a Singleton. We also maintain a list of servers against which the health check needs to run. If a server is removed from this list, the health check software should detect it and remove it from the servers configured to check.  

In the following code, the hc1 and hc2 objects are the same as the class in Singleton.  

Servers are added to the infrastructure for the health check with the addServer() method. First, the iteration of the health check runs against these servers. The changeServer() method removes the last server and adds a new one to the infrastructure scheduled for the health check. So, when the health check runs in the second iteration, it picks up the changed list of servers.  

All this is possible with Singletons. When the servers get added or removed, the health check must be the same object that has the knowledge of the changes made to the infrastructure:  

```python
class HealthCheck:

    _instance = None

    def __new__(cls, *args, **kwargs):

        if not HealthCheck._instance:

            HealthCheck._instance = super(HealthCheck, \

                cls).__new__(cls, *args, **kwargs)

        return HealthCheck._instance

    def __init__(self):

        self._servers = []

    def addServer(self):

        self._servers.append("Server 1")

        self._servers.append("Server 2")

        self._servers.append("Server 3")

        self._servers.append("Server 4")

    def changeServer(self):

        self._servers.pop()

        self._servers.append("Server 5")



hc1 = HealthCheck()

hc2 = HealthCheck()



hc1.addServer()

print("Schedule health check for servers (1)..")

for i in range(4):

    print("Checking ", hc1._servers[i])



hc2.changeServer()

print("Schedule health check for servers (2)..")

for i in range(4):

    print("Checking ", hc2._servers[i])
```

The output of the code is as follows:  

img:omit  

## Drawbacks of the Singleton pattern

While Singletons are used in multiple places to good effect, there can be a few gotchas with this pattern. As Singletons have a global point of access, the following issues can occur:  

- Global variables can be changed by mistake at one place and, as the developer may think that they have remained unchanged, the variables get used elsewhere in the application.
- Multiple references may get created to the same object. As Singleton creates only one object, multiple references can get created at this point to the same object.
- All classes that are dependent on global variables get tightly coupled as a change to the global data by one class can inadvertently impact the other class.
Note

>###Note
>As part of this chapter, you learned a lot on Singletons. Here are a few points that we should remember about Singletons:

- There are many real-world applications where we need to create only one object, such as thread pools, caches, dialog boxes, registry settings, and so on. If we create multiple instances for each of these applications, it will result in the overuse of resources. Singletons work very well in such situations.
- Singleton; a time-tested and proven method of presenting a global point of access without many downsides.
- Of course, there are a few downsides; Singletons can have an inadvertent impact working with global variables or instantiating classes that are resource-intensive but end up not utilizing them.

## Summary

In this chapter, you learned about the Singleton design pattern and the context in which it's used. We understood that Singletons are used when there is a need to have only one object for a class.  

We also looked at various ways in which Singletons can be implemented in Python. The classical implementation allowed multiple instantiation attempts but returned the same object.  

We also discussed the Borg or Monostate pattern, which is a variation of the Singleton pattern. Borg allows the creation of multiple objects that share the same state unlike the single pattern described by GoF.  

We went on to explore the webapp application where Singleton can be applied for consistent database operations across multiple services.

Finally, we also looked at situations where Singletons can go wrong and what situations developers need to avoid.  

At the end of this chapter, we're now comfortable enough to take the next step and study other creational patterns and benefit from them.  

In the next chapter, we'll take a look at another creational pattern and the Factory design pattern. We'll cover the Factory method and Abstract Factory patterns and understand them in the Python implementation.  
