
第一章 模型－视图－控制器
**********************

Many applications start from something small, such as several hundred lines of code prototype of a toy application written in one evening. When you add new features and the application code clutters, it becomes much harder to understand how it works and to modify it, especially for a newcomer. The Model-View-Controller (MVC) pattern serves as the basis for software architecture that will be easily maintained and modified.
The main idea of MVC is about separating an application into three parts: model, view, and controller. There is an easy way to understand MVC—the model is the data and its business logic, the view is the window on the screen, and the controller is the glue between the two.  

很多的应用都是从一个很小的、仅有几百行代码原型的一个一晚上写出来玩具式的应用。当你添加一个新功能和应用代码时，对代码工作原理的理解，以及修改上变得更加困难，对于新手来说尤其如此。而模型－视图－控制（MVC）模式作为软件架构的基础能够提供易于维护和修改的服务。  

While the view and controller depend on the model, the model is independent of the presentation or the controller. This is a key feature of the division. It allows you to work with the model, and hence, the business logic of the application, regardless of the visual presentation.  

视图和控制器依赖模型，而模型独立于表现层或控制器之外。这同时也是分割界限的关键特点。它允许你使用模型，因此，应用的业务逻辑层会无视表现层。  

The following diagram shows the flow of interaction between the user, controller, model, and view. Here, a user makes a request to the application and the controller does the initial processing. After that it manipulates the model, creating, updating, or deleting some data there. The model returns some result to the controller,
that passes the result to view, which renders data to the user.  

下面的图表演示了用户、控制器、模型以及视图之间的交互过程。这里，用户发起一个到应用的请求，控制器初始化处理流程。然后，应用操纵模型来创建、更新、或者删除某些数据。再之后模型将结果返回到控制器，控制器再将结果传递到视图，而视图把数据渲染给用户。  

图片：略  

The MVC pattern gained wide popularity in web development. Many Python web frameworks, such as web2py, Pyramid, Django (uses a flavor of MVC called MVP), Giotto, and Kiss use it.  

MVC模式在web开发中非常流行。很多的Python Web框架，比如web2py，Pyramid，Django（使用的MVC风格的MVP）， Giotto，以及Kiss都用到了该模式。

Let's review key components of the MVC pattern in more detail.  

让我们来回顾一下MVC模式的关键组件的更多细节。  

## Model – the knowledge of the application 
## 模型－ 应用的相关知识
The model is a cornerstone of the application because, while the view and controller depend on the model, the model is independent of the presentation or the controller.  

模型是应用的基石，因为视图和控制器依赖于模型，而模型独立于表现层或者控制器之外。

The model provides knowledge: data, and how to work with that data. The model has a state and methods for changing its state but does not contain information on how this knowledge can be visualized.
This independence makes working independently, covering the model with tests and substituting the controllers/views without changing the business logic of
an application.  

模型

The model is responsible for maintaining the integrity of the program's data, because if that gets corrupted then it's game over for everyone.  

模型负责维护应用数据的完整性，因为如果模型崩溃了那么所有人都会受到影响。  

The following are recommendations for working with models:  


• Strive to perform the following for models:  

° Create data models and interface of work with them
° Validate data and report all errors to the controller

• Avoid working directly with the user interface  

## View – the appearance of knowledge 视图
View receives data from the model through the controller and is responsible for its visualization. It should not contain complex logic; all such logic should go to the models and controllers.  

If you need to change the method of visualization, for example, if you need your web application to be rendered differently depending on whether the user is using a mobile phone or desktop browser, you can change the view accordingly. This can include HTML, XML, console views, and so on.  

The recommendation for working with views are as follows:   
    • Strive to perform the following for views:  
        ° Try to keep them simple; use only simple comparisons and loops

    • Avoid doing the following in views:  
        ° Accessing the database directly
        ° Using any logic other than loops and conditional statements (if-then- else) because the separation of concerns requires all such complex logic to be performed in models

## Controller – the glue between the model and view
## 控制器－模型和视图之间的粘合剂
The direct responsibility of the controllers is to receive data from the request and send it to other parts of the system. Only in this case, the controller is "thin" and is intended only as a bridge (glue layer) between the individual components of the system.  

Let's look at the following recommendations for working with controllers:  

• Strive to perform the following in controllers:  

    ° Pass data from user requests to the model for processing, retrieving and saving the data
    ° Pass data to views for rendering
    ° Handle all request errors and errors from models
• Avoid the following in controllers:
        ° Render data
        ° Work with the database and business logic directly 

Thus, in one statement:  

We need smart models, thin controllers, and dumb views.  

## Benefits of using the MVC
## 使用MVC的好处
MVC brings a lot of positive attributes to your software, including the following:  

1. Decomposition allows you to logically split the application into three relatively independent parts with loose coupling and will decrease its complexity.  


2. Developers typically specialize in one area, for example, a developer might create a user interface or modify the business logic. Thus, it's possible to limit their area of responsibility to only some part of code.

3. MVC makes it possible to change visualization, thus modifying the view without changes in the business logic.

4. MVC makes it possible to change business logic, thus modifying the model without changes in visualization.

5. MVC makes it possible to change the response to a user action (clicking on the button with the mouse, data entry) without changing the implementation of views; it is sufficient to use a different controller.

## Implementation in Python
## Python中的实现
For a practical example, we'll create a very simple but working URL shortening service with a Flask micro framework that is developed by Pocoo.  

Flask is a micro framework that is intended to create simple and short applications. It provides API for handling typical web-development tasks. On the other hand,
it does not have object-relational mapping, form validations, and other features typical to bigger frameworks such as Django or Pyramid. Flask is very expansible with third-party libraries and modules. It does not use MVC out of the box, but let's us take advantage of its high customization and allows us to use the MVC pattern in Flask.  

First, you should have Flask installed. Any one of the following commands should be sufficient to install Flask:  

首先，你应该已经安装了Flask。下面的任何一个命令对于安装Flask都绰绰有余的：  

    • $ sudo pip install Flask 
    • $ sudo easy_install Flask

Let's create a model that contains all our data operations and business logic.  

我们来创建一个包含所有数据操作和业务逻辑的模型。  

We create the Url class that represents the URL entity. This class will have two properties: full_url and short_url. If the user accessed our website with a short URL, we will find the Url instance using short_url and redirect the user there.   

我们创建Url类来表现URL本体。这个类拥有两个特性： `full_url` 和 `short_url`。如果用户使用一个短URL访问我们的网站，我们

The shorten method provides an interface method for the controller. The controller will call this method by passing the full URL. The model will generate a short URL and will save it for further retrieval.  

The `get_by_short_url` method provides the second interface method for the controller. The controller will call this method by passing the `short_url` value, and the model will retrieve the `Url` instance with `short_url` and return it to the controller.  

The other methods are the helpers to process the business logic, for example,
to generate a short URL, as shown in the following code, in order or to save the Url instance and retrieve it from storage.  
另外一个方法是处理业务逻辑的辅助，例如，生成一个下列代码中的短URL，以便保持Url实例并从存储中将其重新取回。  

The code for models.py is as follows:  

 models.py 的代码如下：  

```python
import pickle

class Url(object):

    @classmethod
    def shorten(cls, full_url):
       """Shortens full url."""
       # Create an instance of Url class
       instance = cls()
       instance.full_url = full_url
       instance.short_url = instance.__create_short_url()
       Url.__save_url_mapping(instance)
       return instance
       
    @classmethod
    def get_by_short_url(cls, short_url):
       """Returns Url instance, corresponding to short_url."""
       url_mapping = Url.load_url_mapping()
       return url_mapping.get(short_url)
       
    def __create_short_url(self):
       """Creates short url, saves it and returns it."""
       last_short_url = Url.__load_last_short_url()
       short_url = self.__increment_string(last_short_url)
       Url.__save_last_short_url(short_url)
       return short_url
       
    def __increment_string(self, string):
       """Increments string, that is:
￼       a -> bz -> aa
         az -> ba
         empty string -> a
       """
       if string == '': 
            return 'a'
       last_char = string[-1]
       if last_char != 'z':
         return string[:-1] + chr(ord(last_char) + 1)
       return self.__increment_string(string[:-1]) + 'a'
       
     @staticmethod
     def __load_last_short_url():
       """Returns last generated short url."""
       try:
         return pickle.load(open("last_short.p", "rb"))
       except IOError:
            return ''
            
    @staticmethod
    def __save_last_short_url(url):
       """Saves last generated short url."""
       pickle.dump(url, open("last_short.p", "wb"))
       
    @staticmethod
    def __load_url_mapping():
       """Returns short_url to Url instance mapping."""
       try:
         return pickle.load(open("short_to_url.p", "rb"))
       except IOError:
            return {}
            
    @staticmethod
    def __save_url_mapping(instance):
       """Saves short_url to Url instance mapping."""
       short_to_url = Url.__load_url_mapping()
       short_to_url[instance.short_url] = instance
       pickle.dump(short_to_url, open("short_to_url.p", "wb"))
```

Let's create our view. The view is responsible for rendering data from the model to the end users, and here we have several options. The first option is to create another class where every method is responsible to perform simple logic and call templates to render.  

我们来创建试图。试图负责将来自模型的数据渲染给终端用户，而且我们拥有多个选择。第一个选择是创建

The second option is to use the templates directly. Flask uses the Jinja2 template engine that provides use of template tags. For example, to perform comparisons, we can use the following:  

第二个选择是直接使用模板。Flask使用Jinja2模板引擎提供的模板标签。例如，为了对比，我们使用以下内容：  

```python
   {% if var == True %}
   ...//some code
   {% endif %}
```

Jinja2 also allows us to use passed variables from the controller, iterate loops, and inherit one template from another. So let's use this smart template engine as views, and write a couple of views to render to the user.  

Jinja2也允许我们使用来自控制器，迭代循环的变量，而且它从另外一个模板继承一个模板。因此，我们

Create a views directory and the main_page.html and success.html files should be created in views directory.   

直接地创建视图，main_page.html 和 success.html 文件也应该创建在视图目录中。  

The main_page.html file is the main page of the application that has a form with an input field to enter the full URL of website and the submit button, when clicked, sends full URL to controller.  

The code for main_page.html is as follows:  

```python
   <form action="/shorten/">
     <label>
     <input type="text" name="url" value="" />
       Link to shorten
</label>
     <input type="submit" value="OK"/>
   </form>
```

The success.html page is a view for rendering a success message with a short version of the URL that the user asked to shorten.  

The code for the success.html page looks like this:  

```python
Congratulations! <br />
   Your url: {{ short_url }}
```

The controller will need to process three types of requests:  

```
• Render the main page
• Process the request to shorten the URL
• Process the request to convert the URL from short to full and then redirect it
```

In the following code, the process function renders the main page. Please note how it works: it takes the full URL from the request arguments, passes them to the model, and then passes the returned data to the view.  

The redirect_to_full_url method takes the short URL from the requests, gets the full URL from the model, makes very simple validations, and redirects the user to the full URL.  

The code for controller.py is as follows:  

```python
 # Redirect function is used to forward user to full url if he came
   # from shortened
   # Request is used to encapsulate HTTP request. It will contain request
   # methods, request arguments and other related information
   # from flask import redirect, render_template, request, Flask
   # from werkzeug.exceptions import BadRequest, NotFound
   import models
   # Initialize Flask application
   app = Flask(__name__, template_folder='views')
   @app.route("/")
   def index():
     """Renders main page."""
     return render_template('main_page.html')
   @app.route("/shorten/")
   def shorten():
     """Returns short_url of requested full_url."""
     # Validate user input
     full_url = request.args.get('url')
     if not full_url:
       raise BadRequest()
     # Model returns object with short_url property
     url_model = models.Url.shorten(full_url)
     url_model.short_url
     # Pass data to view and call its render method
     short_url = request.host + '/' + url_model.short_url
     return render_template('success.html', short_url=short_url)

     @app.route('/<path:path>')
    def redirect_to_full(path=''):
     """Gets short url and redirects user to corresponding full url if
   found."""
     # Model returns object with full_url property
     url_model = models.Url.get_by_short_url(path)
     # Validate model return
     if not url_model:
       raise NotFound()
     return redirect(url_model.full_url)
   if __name__ == "__main__":
     app.run(debug=True)
```

To run the application, place these files in one directory, open the terminal, run the following command, and go to http://127.0.0.1:5000 in your browser:  

```python
$ python controller.py
```

You will get a view similar to the following screenshot:  

截图：略  

Now fill the form with a URL, for example, http://www.packtpub.com, click on OK, and see its shortened version.  

If you copy its shortened version and paste it to your browser, you should be redirected to www.packtub.com.  

## 总结
It is important to separate the areas of responsibility to maintain loose coupling
and for the maintainability of the software. MVC divides the application into three relatively independent parts: model, view, and controller. The model is all about knowledge, data, and business logic. The view is about presentation to the end users, and it's important to keep it simple. The controller is the glue between the model and the view, and it's important to keep it thin. In the practical example, you created a simple but fully-functional URL shortening service with the MVC pattern.
In this chapter, you used the pickle module for conserving the application data.  

But what if you were to use the database to do it? You would need to connect to the database. Connecting to the database is a heavy operation, so it is better to connect to it once and then just use this connection during the working of the application. In the next chapter, you will learn about the Singleton pattern that allows you to create only one object even if the instantiation has been done several times.  


